Analysis of Artificial Intelligence-Based Approaches Applied to Non-Invasive Imaging for Early Detection of Melanoma: A Systematic Review.

Melanoma, the deadliest form of skin cancer, poses a significant public health challenge worldwide. Early detection is crucial for improved patient outcomes. Non-invasive skin imaging techniques allow for improved diagnostic accuracy; however, their use is often limited due to the need for skilled practitioners trained to interpret images in a standardized fashion. Recent innovations in artificial intelligence (AI)-based techniques for skin lesion image interpretation show potential for the use of AI in the early detection of melanoma. The aim of this study was to evaluate the current state of AI-based techniques used in combination with non-invasive diagnostic imaging modalities including reflectance confocal microscopy (RCM), optical coherence tomography (OCT), and dermoscopy. We also aimed to determine whether the application of AI-based techniques can lead to improved diagnostic accuracy of melanoma. A systematic search was conducted via the Medline/PubMed, Cochrane, and Embase databases for eligible publications between 2018 and 2022. Screening methods adhered to the 2020 version of the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) guidelines. Included studies utilized AI-based algorithms for melanoma detection and directly addressed the review objectives. We retrieved 40 papers amongst the three databases. All studies directly comparing the performance of AI-based techniques with dermatologists reported the superior or equivalent performance of AI-based techniques in improving the detection of melanoma. In studies directly comparing algorithm performance on dermoscopy images to dermatologists, AI-based algorithms achieved a higher ROC (>80%) in the detection of melanoma. In these comparative studies using dermoscopic images, the mean algorithm sensitivity was 83.01% and the mean algorithm specificity was 85.58%. Studies evaluating machine learning in conjunction with OCT boasted accuracy of 95%, while studies evaluating RCM reported a mean accuracy rate of 82.72%. Our results demonstrate the robust potential of AI-based techniques to improve diagnostic accuracy and patient outcomes through the early identification of melanoma. Further studies are needed to assess the generalizability of these AI-based techniques across different populations and skin types, improve standardization in image processing, and further compare the performance of AI-based techniques with board-certified dermatologists to evaluate clinical applicability.